The aryl hydrocarbon receptor links TH17-cell-mediated autoimmunity to environmental toxins

Marc Veldhoen1, Keiji Hirota1, Astrid M. Westendorf2,3, Jan Buer2, Laure Dumoutier4, Jean-Christophe Renauld4 & Brigitta Stockinger1

Division of Molecular Immunology, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW71AA, UK
Institute for Medical Microbiology, University Hospital Essen, D-45122, Germany
Helmholtz Center for Infection Research, D-38124 Braunschweig, Germany
Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Brussels branch, and Experimental Medicine Unit, Universite Catholique de Louvain, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium
Correspondence to: Brigitta Stockinger1 Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to B.S. (Email: bstocki@nimr.mrc.ac.uk).

Top of pageAbstract
The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor best known for mediating the toxicity of dioxin1. Environmental factors are believed to contribute to the increased prevalence of autoimmune diseases, many of which are due to the activity of TH17 T cells, a new helper T-cell subset characterized by the production of the cytokine IL-17. Here we show that in the CD4+ T-cell lineage of mice AHR expression is restricted to the TH17 cell subset and its ligation results in the production of the TH17 cytokine interleukin (IL)-22. AHR is also expressed in human TH17 cells. Activation of AHR by a high-affinity ligand during TH17 cell development markedly increases the proportion of TH17 T cells and their production of cytokines. CD4+ T cells from AHR-deficient mice can develop TH17 cell responses, but when confronted with AHR ligand fail to produce IL-22 and do not show enhanced TH17 cell development. AHR activation during induction of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis causes accelerated onset and increased pathology in wild-type mice, but not AHR-deficient mice. AHR ligands may therefore represent co-factors in the development of autoimmune diseases.

The AHR is a ligand-dependent transcription factor that mediates a range of critical cellular events in response to halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons and non-halogenated polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)1. AHR expression is ubiquitous in vertebrate cells, suggesting important and widespread roles, but the physiological role of AHR is not yet understood2. Mice with a targeted mutation of the Ahr gene provided unequivocal evidence that the AHR is crucial to TCDD-induced toxicity and suggested a function for AHR in liver development3, 4, 5.

Gene array analysis of CD4+ effector T-cell subsets showed that the TH17 CD4+ T-cell subset, in addition to the lineage-defining transcription factor Rorc (encoding ROR-γt, an isoform of ROR-γ expressed in the thymus)6, expresses Ahr. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis of CD4+ effector T-cell subsets from wild-type and AHR-deficient C57BL/6 (B6) mice established that the lineage-defining transcription factors T-bet, Gata3 and Rorc are expressed in a comparable manner as are the marker cytokines interferon (IFN)-γ, IL-4, IL-17A and IL-17F (Fig. 1a). There is also similar Foxp3 expression in CD4+ T cells from B6 and AHR-deficient mice (Supplementary Fig. 1b). AHR was only induced under TH17-cell-inducing conditions (IL-6 and transforming growth factor (TGF)-β) with levels of expression similar to liver (Fig. 1a, d). Under our conditions we found no AHR expression in cultures with TGF-β alone (induced T-regulatory cells; iTreg) or IL-6 alone and no expression in natural Treg cells (Supplementary Fig. 1a). Notably, AHR expression is also found in human TH17 cells (Fig. 1b).

Figure 1: AHR is selectively expressed in the T-H17 cell subset.
a, Fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS)-sorted naive CD4+ T cells from B6 or AHR-deficient mice stimulated under TH0, TH1, TH2, iTreg or TH17 conditions and harvested on day 5 for quantitative PCR. mRNA levels, normalized to Hprt expression ± s.d., are shown. Rorc, mRNA encoding ROR-γt. b, mRNA levels ± s.d. of AHR in human CD4+ T cells stimulated under TH1 or TH17 conditions. c, mRNA levels ± s.d. for Il22 in CD4+ T cells subsets from B6 or AHR-deficient mice. d, mRNA levels of Ahr in CD4+ T-cell subsets and TH17 cells from three mice compared with mouse liver.

High resolution image and legend (224K)

Although CD4+ T cells from AHR-deficient mice could differentiate into TH17 cells, they lacked the expression of IL-22 (Fig. 1c). IL-22, originally defined as a hepatocyte-stimulating factor7, is co-expressed with IL-17 by TH17 T cells and its expression is thought to be enhanced by dendritic-cell-derived IL-23 (refs 8, 9). The biological functions of IL-22 are not fully understood: on the one hand IL-22 seems to be pro-inflammatory, inducing dermal inflammation and pro-inflammatory gene expression in the skin8, 10, on the other hand IL-22 delivery ameliorates T-cell-mediated liver injury in T-cell-mediated hepatitis11, 12.

AHR resides in the cytoplasm in complex with Hsp90 until binding of ligand triggers conformational changes resulting in an exchange of Hsp90 for the nuclear translocation component ARNT (reviewed in ref. 1). Arnt was found expressed in all CD4+ T-cell subsets (data not shown). Ligation of AHR by 6-formylindolo[3,2-b]carbazole (FICZ), a tryptophan-derived photoproduct that is thought to be an endogenous ligand with high affinity for the AHR receptor, upregulates genes encoding xenobiotic metabolizing cytochrome P450 enzymes such as Cyp1a1 (ref. 13).

To test whether exposure of T cells to FICZ influences differentiation of naive CD4+ T cells to effector cells, we added FICZ during the in vitro differentiation of CD4+ effector T-cell subsets. The addition of FICZ did not induce Ahr expression or its downstream target Cyp1a1 in TH0, TH1, TH2 and iTreg T-cell subsets (Fig. 2a) and did not alter their expression of Ifng, Il4, Il21 nor their lineage-defining transcription factors (Supplementary Fig. 1c). However, the presence of FICZ during TH17-cell-inducing conditions led to strong upregulation of Il17a, Il17f and particularly of Il22 mRNA expression (Fig. 2a and Supplementary Fig. 2a).

Figure 2: AHR ligation promotes the TH17 cell programme.
a, Mean mRNA levels ± s.d. from B6 CD4+ effector subsets generated in the presence or absence of 200 nM FICZ. b, CD4+ T cells from B6 (top panels) and AHR-deficient mice (bottom panels) cultured under TH17-cell-inducing conditions in the presence or absence of 200 nM FICZ and stained for expression of IL-17A versus IL-17F (left panels) and IL-17A versus IL-22 (right panels) after re-stimulation with phorbol dibutyrate and ionomycin. A summary of all experiments is shown in Supplementary Fig. 2b. c, mRNA levels of IL17A, IL17F, IL22 and CYP1A1 in human CD4+ T cells stimulated under TH17-cell-inducing conditions in the presence or absence of 3 μM β-naphthoflavone (β-NF).

High resolution image and legend (284K)

Comparison of TH17 differentiation in CD4+ T cells from wild-type B6 and AHR-deficient mice by intracellular staining showed that exposure of B6 CD4+ T cells to FICZ under TH17-cell-inducing conditions strongly enhanced IL-17A and IL-17F production and increased the proportion and staining intensity of cells producing IL-22 (Fig. 2b, top panels and Supplementary Fig. 2b). In contrast, IL-17A and IL-17F production was attenuated in TH17 cells from AHR-deficient mice and no IL-22 was detectable whether FICZ was present or not (Fig. 2b, bottom panels). A similar response was seen with another AHR ligand, β-naphthoflavone, which has lower affinity for AHR and consequently requires about a 10-fold higher dose compared with FICZ (Supplementary Fig. 2c). Similar to mouse, human TH17 cells reacted to AHR ligation with increased expression of IL17A, IL17F and IL22 as well as induction of CYP1A1 (Fig. 2c).

To test whether Ahr expression on its own is essential and sufficient to drive IL-22 expression, we performed retroviral transduction of sorted naive AHR-deficient CD4+ T cells with an AHR–green fluorescent protein (GFP) construct or a GFP vector control construct. Transduction under neutral, TH1, TH2 or iTreg conditions did not reconstitute IL-22 expression even in the presence of FICZ (Supplementary Fig. 3). However, under TH17-cell-inducing conditions, reconstitution of AHR expression by retroviral transduction induced expression of IL-22 (Fig. 3a, top-right panel) and increased the proportion of IL-17-producing cells (Fig. 3b, top-right panel). Exposure to FICZ resulted in a substantial increase in IL-22 (Fig. 3a, bottom-right panel) as well as the enhanced expression of IL-17A (Fig. 3b, bottom right panel). PCR with reverse transcription (RT–PCR) analysis of cultured Ahr-transduced TH17 cells confirmed the increase in Il17 expression, the enhancement of Il22 as well as the induction of the Ahr target Cyp1a1 on exposure to FICZ (Fig. 3c). Thus, Ahr expression is only functional in CD4+ T cells that have differentiated to the TH17 lineage.

Figure 3: Retroviral transduction of AHR restores IL-22 expression.
a, b, FACS-sorted naive CD4+ T cells from AHR-deficient mice cultured under TH17-cell-inducing conditions and transduced with vector control (RV-GFP) or AHR-containing construct (RV-AHR-GFP) in the presence (bottom panels) or absence (top panels) of FICZ. IL-22 intracellular staining versus GFP expression (a) and IL-17A expression in gated GFP+ cells (b) were assessed. c, Quantitative PCR for Il17a, Il22 and Cyp1a1 in TH17 cells from AHR-deficient mice transduced with control retroviral vector, control vector in the presence of 200 nM FICZ, AHR-containing vector, or AHR-containing vector in the presence of FICZ.

High resolution image and legend (199K)

Next we immunized B6 mice with myelin oligodendrocyte peptide 35–55 (MOG35–55) in complete Freund’s adjuvant (CFA), removed draining lymph nodes 7 days later and isolated CCR6+CD4+ T cells (which are enriched in TH17 cells14, 15) to test whether Ahr is also expressed in TH17 cells generated in vivo. CCR6+CD4+ T cells expressed Ahr, Il17a, Il17f, Il22 and Rorc, whereas the CCR6-CD4+ T-cell fraction lacked expression of Ahr and TH17 markers, confirming that physiological differentiation in vivo recapitulates in vitro differentiation (Fig. 4a).

Figure 4: EAE is enhanced by AHR ligation.
a, RT–PCR analysis for Il17a, Il17f, Il22, Rorc (ROR-γt) and Ahr in FACS-sorted CCR6-CD4+ T cells or CCR6+CD4+ T cells from draining lymph nodes 7 days after MOG35–55 immunization. b, Mean numbers of IL-17A+, IL-22+ and Foxp3+ cells ± s.d. in spinal cord 18 days after immunization of B6 mice (n = 4) with MOG35–55 (Ctrl) or MOG35–55 + FICZ (FICZ) and of AHR-deficient mice with MOG35–55 (AHR) (n = 4). c, Mean clinical EAE scores ± s.e.m. of B6 (n = 12) or AHR-deficient mice (n = 12) immunized with MOG35–55 in the absence or presence of 600 ng FICZ. d, Mean clinical EAE scores ± s.e.m. of MOG35–55-immunized chimaeras from AHR-deficient donors into irradiated B6 hosts (AHR-B6 n = 8), or bone marrow from B6 donors into irradiated AHR-deficient hosts (B6-AHR n = 8). e, Incidence, mean day of onset and mean maximal scores for the mice in c. P values are P = 0.0013 for mean day of onset in B6 versus B6 + FICZ and P = 0.03 for B6 versus AHR-deficient.

High resolution image and legend (258K)

TH17 T cells have a prominent role in the pathology of autoimmune diseases such as experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), which is induced by immunization with MOG peptide 35–55 and CFA. Analysis of spinal cord at the height of the EAE response on day 18 showed increased numbers of CD4+ T cells producing IL-17 and IL-22 in B6 mice treated with MOG35–55/CFA and FICZ, whereas AHR-deficient mice showed reduced numbers of IL-17-producing T cells and minimal numbers of IL-22 producers (Fig. 4b). There was no difference in the numbers of Foxp3-expressing regulatory T cells in spinal cord in the three groups of mice.

Whereas B6 mice developed EAE with a mean day of onset of 13.9, AHR-deficient mice developed EAE with delayed kinetics (mean day of onset 15.6) in line with the attenuated TH17 differentiation seen in vitro. Despite the delayed onset of EAE, most AHR-deficient mice succumbed to disease eventually (Fig. 4c, e). Stimulation of AHR by inclusion of FICZ in the antigen emulsion accelerated the onset (day 11.7) and increased the severity of EAE in B6 mice, but, as expected, did not influence the onset or severity of EAE in AHR-deficient mice (day 15.8) (Fig. 4c, e). To assess the influence of AHR deficiency in haematopoietic or non-haematopoietic cells, we also induced EAE in chimaeras constructed either by injection of AHR-deficient bone marrow into irradiated wild-type mice (AHR-B6) or by injection of B6 wild-type bone marrow into irradiated AHR-deficient mice (B6-AHR). AHR-B6 chimaeras showed attenuated EAE like AHR-deficient mice, whereas B6-AHR chimaeras developed EAE with kinetics and severity similar to wild-type mice (Fig. 4d).

Studies on the effect of AHR stimulation on the immune system have so far focused exclusively on TCDD as a ligand because of its toxicological relevance. Although adverse effects of TCDD on immune responses are well documented16, no direct measurements of AHR expression on highly purified polarized subsets of CD4+ T cells have been reported. TCDD, which cannot be metabolized and therefore causes prolonged stimulation of AHR in many cells of the body, is known to induce profound suppression of immune responses in wild-type, but not AHR-deficient, mice16, but despite decades of research the underlying mechanisms for this profound toxicity remain unclear. More recently, it has been suggested that TCDD promotes the generation of regulatory T cells17 while causing the premature decline of activated CD4+ T cells. In our hands, stimulation of AHR by FICZ did not influence the number of regulatory T cells during MOG35–55-induced EAE responses (see Fig. 4b). It is conceivable that the high toxicity of TCDD for effector cells causes a proportional shift in regulatory T cells—which are, in general, more resistant to many depletion regimes18, 19—due to the death of other cells, rather than an actual expansion in numbers. Although TCDD may be the classical AHR ligand used in the toxicology field to analyse the effects of AHR activation, it is clear that it is not a natural ligand and it is widely recognized that pollutants such as TCDD are unlikely to have provided the evolutionary pressure for the function of this highly conserved system. There is ongoing debate in the toxicology field about what is the most relevant physiological ligand for AHR20. Nevertheless, compelling indirect evidence shows that ultraviolet photoproducts of tryptophan, such as the high-affinity ligand FICZ studied in our paper, could be synthesized in vivo as exposure of human skin to ultraviolet light induces CYP1A1 (ref. 21). Future studies focusing on additional physiological ligands of AHR that can be metabolized by the CYP1 enzymes and therefore cause only transient AHR activation may give further insights into the consequences of AHR stimulation in TH17 cells.

Our data show that AHR, in addition to promoting the expression of IL-22, enhances TH17 cell development and the expression levels of IL-17A and IL-17F, and consequently increases autoimmune pathology. Blockade of IL-17A with an auto-vaccine as well as neutralizing antibody can completely prevent the development of EAE22, 23, emphasizing the central role of IL-17A in the pathogenesis of this autoimmune disease. Although it has been suggested that IL-22 may contribute to autoimmune pathology because, like IL-17, it disrupts blood–brain barrier tight junctions24, IL-22-deficient mice do not seem to have altered susceptibility to EAE induction25, suggesting that this cytokine may be dispensable for the development of pathology in EAE. Thus, the enhancement of IL-17 production by AHR ligation may be more crucial than the induction of IL-22 in determining disease severity.

It is currently thought that IL-22 expression depends on induction by IL-23 (refs 8, 9). Re-stimulation of lymph node cells from mice immunized with MOG35–55/CFA or MOG35–55/CFA and FICZ in the presence or absence of IL-23 showed that IL-23 increased the proportion of IL-17-producing cells both from wild-type and AHR-deficient mice (Supplementary Fig. 4, left), but only had a small effect on the production of IL-22 (Supplementary Fig. 4b, right), suggesting that IL-23 has some effect independent of AHR ligation, although clearly stimulation of AHR seems to be the dominant pathway for IL-22 production.

How AHR interacts with the TH17 pathway is currently unknown, but there is a substantial amount of literature (reviewed in ref. 26) describing interactions of AHR with other key regulatory proteins including nuclear factor-κB27, which has a role in the induction of EAE28. The core nucleotide sequence to which the nuclear AHR complex binds, also termed the ‘xenobiotic responsive element’29, occurs frequently in the mammalian genome and is also represented in IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-22 and ROR-γt. Although basal expression of AHR and IL-22 is detectable in TH17 T cells in the apparent absence of a ligand, there are numerous endogenous agents that can activate AHR, such as prostaglandins, bilirubin at high concentration, modified low-density lipoprotein and various modifications of tryptophan, whose ultraviolet-light-irradiated photoconversion into the high-affinity ligand FICZ is only one example (reviewed in ref. 20).

Autoimmune diseases are multifactorial, depending on intrinsic components such as genetics, hormones or age, and environmental factors, including infections, diet, drugs and chemicals. The increasing prevalence of certain autoimmune diseases in highly industrialized countries is probably connected to such environmental factors.

Our data linking a transcription factor responsive to environmental pollutants to the TH17 programme open intriguing possibilities regarding the potential of such factors to initiate or augment autoimmune conditions, and warrant closer examination of a possible role of AHR in human autoimmune diseases.

Top of page
Methods Summary
Mice
C57BL/6 (B6) and AHR-deficient mice on a B6 background (B6 BRA AHRKO)3, originally obtained from the Jackson Laboratory via A. Smith, were bred in the specified pathogen free (SPF) facility at NIMR. All animal experiments were done according to institutional guidelines and Home Office regulations.
Human T-cell culture
Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells from a healthy volunteer were isolated by Ficoll/Paque, and CD4+ T cells were purified by magnetic sorting and cultured at 1.5 × 105 cells per well in plates coated with anti-CD3 (1 μg ml-1) and anti-CD28 (1 μg ml-1) in the presence of 10 ng ml-1 IL-1 and 40 ng ml-1 IL-6 (TH17 condition) or 3 ng ml-1 IL-12, 10 ng ml-1 IL-2 and 10 μg ml-1 anti-TGF-β (TH1 condition). Quantitative PCR analysis for TH17 markers and AHR expression was performed on day 4.
In vitro T-cell differentiation and cytokine staining
A detailed description of procedures is given in Methods.
Real-time PCR
The expression of mRNA for transcription factors and cytokines in CD4+ T-cell subsets was analysed 4–5 days after T-cell activation using specific primers from Applied Biosystems and expression was normalized to the housekeeping gene Hprt. More details and a list of primers used can be found in Methods.
Retroviral transduction
AHR was cloned into vector pIRES2-EGFP (Clontech) generating a bicistronic mRNA encoding AHR and, separated by an IRES element, EGFP. Viruses were generated by simultaneous CaCl2-mediated transient transfections of 293T cells with three plasmids providing vector, Gag-Pol, and Env functions. Details of the transduction protocol are given in Methods.
EAE induction
EAE was induced and scored as described previously30. Some mice received 600 ng FICZ in the antigen emulsion. Draining lymph nodes were isolated 7 days after immunization. Spinal cord was isolated on day 18 after EAE induction for determination of cell numbers.
Full methods accompany this paper.