Reciprocal developmental pathways for the generation of pathogenic effector TH17 and regulatory T cells

Estelle Bettelli1,4, Yijun Carrier1,4, Wenda Gao2,4, Thomas Korn1, Terry B. Strom2, Mohamed Oukka3, Howard L. Weiner1 & Vijay K. Kuchroo1

Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and
Transplant Research Center, Beth Israel Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA
Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 65 Landsdowne Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA
*These authors contributed equally to this work
Correspondence to: Mohamed Oukka3Vijay K. Kuchroo1 Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to V.K.K. (Email: vkuchroo@rics.bwh.harvard.edu) and M.O. (Email: moukka@rics.bwh.harvard.edu).

Top of pageAbstract
On activation, T cells undergo distinct developmental pathways, attaining specialized properties and effector functions. T-helper (TH) cells are traditionally thought to differentiate into TH1 and TH2 cell subsets. TH1 cells are necessary to clear intracellular pathogens and TH2 cells are important for clearing extracellular organisms1, 2. Recently, a subset of interleukin (IL)-17-producing T (TH17) cells distinct from TH1 or TH2 cells has been described and shown to have a crucial role in the induction of autoimmune tissue injury3, 4, 5. In contrast, CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T (Treg) cells inhibit autoimmunity and protect against tissue injury6. Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) is a critical differentiation factor for the generation of Treg cells7. Here we show, using mice with a reporter introduced into the endogenous Foxp3 locus, that IL-6, an acute phase protein induced during inflammation8, 9, completely inhibits the generation of Foxp3+ Treg cells induced by TGF-β. We also demonstrate that IL-23 is not the differentiation factor for the generation of TH17 cells. Instead, IL-6 and TGF-β together induce the differentiation of pathogenic TH17 cells from naive T cells. Our data demonstrate a dichotomy in the generation of pathogenic (TH17) T cells that induce autoimmunity and regulatory (Foxp3+) T cells that inhibit autoimmune tissue injury.

CD4+CD25+ Treg cells express the forkhead/winged helix transcription factor Foxp3 (refs 10–12). Using a gene-targeting approach, we generated a mouse in which we introduced a bicistronic enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) reporter into the endogenous Foxp3 locus (Foxp3–GFP ‘knockin’ mice), allowing us to track faithfully Foxp3-expressing regulatory cells in vivo and study the factors that influence Foxp3 expression and Treg generation. Consistent with previous observations7, activation of CD4+Foxp3- T cells from the Foxp3–GFP knockin mice in the presence of TGF-β induced Foxp3 expression in 50% of T cells (Fig. 1a, b). Next, we assessed the ability of pro-inflammatory cytokines to modulate Foxp3 induction via TGF-β. Notably, TGF-β-mediated conversion of CD4+CD25- cells into Foxp3+GFP+ Treg cells was strongly inhibited by IL-6 (Fig. 1a, b). To understand the mechanism by which IL-6 mediated the inhibition of Foxp3 expression, we tested the cytokine production of T cells that were activated in the presence TGF-β plus IL-6, and found that these cells produced large amounts of IL-17 (Fig. 1c).

Figure 1: Inhibition of Treg development by different cytokines.
a–c, FACS-sorted CD4+GFP- (Foxp3-) cells from Foxp3–GFP knockin mice were stimulated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies for 3 days (a, b) or anti-CD3 plus antigen-presenting cells for 48 h in the presence of different cytokines (c). a, Percentage of GFP-expressing cells induced by various cytokines in the presence of TGF-β (the percentage of GFP+ cells induced in the presence of TGF-β was kept at 100%). b, GFP expression in CD4+ T cells. c, Amount of IL-17 produced in triplicate wells ± s.d.

High resolution image and legend (68K)

Recent studies have shown that IL-23 can differentiate T cells into TH17 cells (refs 3–5). To address the role of IL-23 compared with TGF-β plus IL-6 in the differentiation of naive T cells into TH17 cells, we used T cells from a myelin (myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein, MOG)-specific T-cell receptor (TCR) transgenic mouse (hereafter called 2D2)13. In vitro activation of unsorted splenic T cells from the transgenic mice in the presence MOG35–55 peptide and recombinant IL-23 resulted in the generation of 6.5% of IL-17-producing CD4+ T cells (Fig. 2a). Because the IL-23 receptor is expressed only on activated/memory T cells14, 15, we wanted to investigate further whether IL-23 could guide differentiation of naive T cells into TH17 cells. To address this question, naive 2D2 transgenic T cells (CD4+CD62Lhi) were stimulated with anti-CD3 in the presence or absence of IL-23. Surprisingly, IL-23 alone, in the presence of neutralizing antibodies to IL-4 and interferon-γ (IFN-γ) (Fig. 2b), or together with other cytokines (IL-6 or TGF-β), did not induce differentiation of IL-17-producing T cells (Fig. 2c). These results suggest that IL-23 may expand the pool of IL-17-producing cells from in vivo activated/memory T-cell populations, but that IL-23 is incapable of differentiating IL-17-producing cells from naive T-cell precursors. Although neither TGF-β nor IL-6 alone induced the generation of IL-17-producing T cells from naive 2D2 TCR transgenic T cells, a combination of the two cytokines (IL-6 plus TGF-β), consistent with a recently published report16, induced most naive T cells (80.9%) to produce IL-17 (Fig. 2c). TGF-β could serve to inhibit IL-4 and IFN-γ production and thus allow IL-6 to induce preferentially the generation of TH17 cells. However, culture of naive T cells with IL-6 and a cocktail of neutralizing antibodies for IL-4 and IFN-γ modestly increased (by 6.7%) the number of IL-17-producing cells compared with cells cultured with IL-6 alone, suggesting that TGF-β does not just suppress the generation of TH1 and TH2 cells but actively participates in the generation of TH17 cells (Fig. 2b). In addition, IL-17 production induced by IL-6 plus TGF-β was not inhibited by the addition of a neutralizing antibody specific for the p40 chain of IL-23 (Fig. 2c, see also Supplementary Fig. S1).

Figure 2: Cytokines required for the generation of TH17 cells.
a, Splenocytes from 2D2 TCR transgenic mice were stimulated with MOG35–55 peptide in neutral conditions or with IL-23. b, c, FACS-sorted naive CD4+CD62Lhi T cells from 2D2 TCR transgenic mice were stimulated with soluble anti-CD3, C57BL/6 irradiated spleen cells and the indicated cytokines plus neutralizing antibodies. Five days after the activation, cells were re-stimulated with PMA/ionomycin and subjected to intracellular cytokine staining. The contour plots represent IL-17 expression in CD4+ cells.

High resolution image and legend (74K)

We have shown that whereas IL-6 suppresses TGF-β-induced Foxp3 expression and Treg generation, the combination of IL-6 and TGF-β promotes the generation of TH17 cells, suggesting that effector and regulatory T cells may differentiate from the same precursor T cell depending on the balance of cytokines present in the environment. To address this hypothesis, we differentiated naive CD4+CD62LhiGFP- T cells from 2D2 × Foxp3–GFP knockin mice under neutral conditions, or in the presence of TGF-β or TGF-β plus IL-6, and monitored the expression of IL-17 (marker of effector T cells) versus Foxp3–GFP (marker of Treg cells). Activation of T cells with anti-CD3 in the absence of exogenous cytokines did not result in the induction of either IL-17 or Foxp3, but instead resulted in the induction of some IFN-γ-producing T cells (Fig. 3a, b). Addition of TGF-β in the culture resulted in the generation of Foxp3+ T cells but not IL-17 or IFN-γ production; however, addition of TGF-β plus IL-6 to T cells during differentiation completely abrogated the expression of Foxp3 and resulted in concomitant expression of IL-17 from these T cells (Fig. 3a, b). No IFN-γ-producing cells were detected under these conditions. Thus, the induction of Foxp3 and IL-17 production in T cells seems to be mutually exclusive. To test the functionality of cells stimulated with TGF-β or TGF-β plus IL-6, we purified CD4+CD62LhiGFP- cells from Foxp3–GFP knockin mice and activated them in the presence of either TGF-β or TGF-β plus IL-6. Most TCR-activated CD4+ T cells cultured in the presence of TGF-β became GFP positive, and the cells cultured in the presence of TGF-β plus IL-6 remained GFP negative. T cells generated in the presence of TGF-β and expressing Foxp3 (GFP+) were anergic and inhibited the proliferative response of CD4+CD25- T cells similar to naturally occurring CD4+CD25+ Treg cells (Fig. 3c), demonstrating that TGF-β does induce bona fide Treg cells. In contrast, T cells differentiated in the presence of TGF-β and IL-6 (and that produce IL-17) were neither anergic nor immunosuppressive because they showed greater proliferation compared with the CD4+CD25- T cells. Proliferation of T cells differentiated in vitro in the presence of TGF-β and IL-6 could be suppressed both by naturally occurring CD4+CD25+ Treg cells and by in vitro TGF-β-converted Foxp3+ T cells (Fig. 3c).

Figure 3: Reciprocal expression of Foxp3 and IL-17 in T cells during differentiation.
FACS-sorted naive CD4+CD62LhiGFP- T cells from 2D2 × Foxp3–GFP knockin mice were stimulated with soluble anti-CD3, antigen-presenting cells and the indicated cytokines. a, Foxp3 (GFP) and cytokine (IL-17 or IFN-γ) intracellular expression in CD4+ T cells after 5 days. b, Expression of IFN-γ, Foxp3 and IL-17 mRNA relative to control actin (in triplicate wells ± s.d.). c, Proliferation in triplicate wells (± s.d.) of CD4+CD25- cells and TTGF-β+IL-6 cells (T cells differentiated in the presence of TGF-β and IL-6) in the presence of antigen-presenting cells, soluble anti-CD3 and different concentrations of CD4+CD25+ T cells or TTGF-β cells (T cells generated in the presence of TGF-β) measured by [3H]thymidine incorporation.

High resolution image and legend (102K)

TGF-β has been shown to be a very important immunosuppressive cytokine that not only directly suppresses effector T-cell function but also induces CD4+CD25+ Treg cells and TH3 cells17, 18. To test the effect of TGF-β on T cells in vivo, we have generated a TGF-β transgenic mouse (TgTGF-β) in which TGF-β1 is placed under the IL-2 promoter. In vitro activation of 2D2 × TgTGF-β T cells with MOG35–55 peptide results in the production of large amounts of TGF-β, and these cells suppress experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) on adoptive transfer, showing that activation of TGF-β alone in these cells results in the generation of regulatory T cells that suppress EAE (Y.C. and H.L.W., manuscript submitted). To test the combined effect of TGF-β and IL-6 in vivo, we immunized TgTGF-β mice with MOG35–55 peptide emulsified in complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA). Spleen cells from immunized wild-type or TgTGF-β mice produced large amounts of IL-6 compared with spleen cells from non-immunized mice (Fig. 4a). T cells from immunized 2D2 TCR transgenic mice produced large amounts of IFN-γ, tumour-necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and very low levels of IL-4, IL-10 and IL-17 (Fig. 4b). In contrast, T cells from MOG/CFA-immunized 2D2 × TgTGF-β mice produced TGF-β, low levels of IFN-γ and TNF-α, and very high levels of IL-17 (Fig. 4a, b). We then immunized 2D2 and 2D2 × TgTGF-β mice with MOG/CFA for the development of EAE. 2D2 TCR transgenic mice developed more severe disease compared with wild-type mice (Fig. 4c). Notably, the 2D2 × TgTGF-β mice developed the most severe and fulminant disease (Fig. 4c, Table 1 and Supplementary Table S1). Furthermore, analysis of the cytokine profile of the infiltrating CD4+ T cells in the central nervous system (CNS) of 2D2 versus 2D2 × TgTGF-β mice showed that the double-transgenic mice had twice as many infiltrating IL-17-producing CD4+ T cells in the CNS than 2D2 transgenic mice. Consistent with the idea of a reciprocal relationship between Treg cells and TH17 cells, the 2D2 × TgTGF-β mice had a reduced frequency (75% less) of Foxp3+ Treg cells infiltrating in the CNS compared with the 2D2 transgenic mice (Fig. 4d). These in vivo data further show that activation of T cells in the presence of TGF-β and IL-6 results in the predominant generation of IL-17-producing T cells and fewer Foxp3+ Treg cells and that, under these conditions, mice develop exacerbated autoimmune disease.

Figure 4: Enhanced IL-17 production by T cells and CNS autoimmunity in TGF-β transgenic mice.
a, b, Splenocytes from naive C57BL/6 wild-type (WT) mice (a, left panel), wild-type and TgTGF-β mice immunized with MOG35–55 peptide (a, right panel), and 2D2 and 2D2 × TgTGF-β mice immunized with MOG35–55 peptide (b), were stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (for IL-6) or MOG35–55 peptide (for other cytokines). Data represent mean cytokine produced in each group (n = 3) ± s.d. c, Wild-type C57BL/6 (n = 13), 2D2 (n = 11) and 2D2 × TgTGF-β (n = 13) mice were immunized with MOG35–55 in CFA and monitored for clinical signs of EAE (top panel). Linear regression analysis of the individual disease curves reveals a highly significant difference (P < 0.0001) between each of the EAE groups (bottom panel). d, Frequency of IL-17- and Foxp3-expressing CD4+ T cells isolated from the CNS of 2D2 × TgTGF-β or 2D2 mice at the peak of disease.

High resolution image and legend (95K)

Table 1: EAE in 2D2 and 2D2 × TgTGF-β mice
Full table


Our data suggest that there is not only a functional antagonism between TH17 and Treg cells but that there is a dichotomy in their generation as well. Therefore, Treg cells and TH17 effectors arise in a mutually exclusive fashion, depending on whether they are activated in the presence of TGF-β or TGF-β plus IL-6. At the steady-state level or in the absence of any inflammatory insult, TGF-β produced in the immune system will suppress the generation of effector T cells and induce Foxp3+ regulatory T cells, and thereby maintain self-tolerance. However, on infection or inflammation, IL-6 produced by the activated innate immune system will suppress the generation of TGF-β-induced Treg cells and induce a pro-inflammatory T-cell response predominated by TH17 cells. This is consistent with the in vivo observation that destructive arthritis in IFN-γ-deficient mice can be treated with anti-IL-17, and neutralization of IL-17 results in the generation of CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells19, further supporting the concept that there is a functional antagonism between TH17 effectors and CD4+CD25+ Treg cells. Furthermore, IL-6-deficient mice have been shown to be highly resistant to the development of EAE20, 21, 22, 23. We have confirmed this observation and further determined that IL-6-deficient mice immunized with the encephalitogenic MOG35–55 peptide have a deficit in IL-17-producing T cells infiltrating the CNS (Supplementary Fig. S2).

Our results support the concept that there is a reciprocal developmental pathway for the generation of pathogenic TH17 cells and protective Treg cells in the immune system depending on the state of the innate immune system and production of acute phase proteins like IL-6. Once induced, CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ cells could also suppress other T-cell subsets (like TH1 and TH2 cells), as well as TH17 cells. TH17 and Treg subsets may therefore have evolved to induce or regulate tissue inflammation, analogous to the dichotomy of TH1 and TH2 T-cell subsets, which primarily mediate immunity against infectious organisms.