Transforming growth factor-β induces development of the TH17 lineage

Paul R. Mangan1,2, Laurie E. Harrington1, Darrell B. O'Quinn1, Whitney S. Helms1, Daniel C. Bullard3, Charles O. Elson4, Robin D. Hatton1, Sharon M. Wahl5, Trenton R. Schoeb3 & Casey T. Weaver1,2

Departments of Pathology,
Microbiology,
Genomics and
Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35294-2170, USA
Cellular Immunology Section, Oral Infection and Immunity Branch, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Disease, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4352, USA
Correspondence to: Casey T. Weaver1,2 Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to C.T.W. (Email: cweaver@uab.edu).

Top of pageAbstract
A new lineage of effector CD4+ T cells characterized by production of interleukin (IL)-17, the T-helper-17 (TH17) lineage, was recently described based on developmental and functional features distinct from those of classical TH1 and TH2 lineages1, 2. Like TH1 and TH2, TH17 cells almost certainly evolved to provide adaptive immunity tailored to specific classes of pathogens3, such as extracellular bacteria4. Aberrant TH17 responses have been implicated in a growing list of autoimmune disorders5, 6, 7. TH17 development has been linked to IL-23, an IL-12 cytokine family member that shares with IL-12 a common subunit, IL-12p40 (ref. 8). The IL-23 and IL-12 receptors also share a subunit, IL-12Rβ1, that pairs with unique, inducible components, IL-23R and IL-12Rβ2, to confer receptor responsiveness9. Here we identify transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) as a cytokine critical for commitment to TH17 development. TGF-β acts to upregulate IL-23R expression, thereby conferring responsiveness to IL-23. Although dispensable for the development of IL-17-producing T cells in vitro and in vivo, IL-23 is required for host protection against a bacterial pathogen, Citrobacter rodentium. The action of TGF-β on naive T cells is antagonized by interferon-γ and IL-4, thus providing a mechanism for divergence of the TH1, TH2 and TH17 lineages.

Interferon-γ (IFN-γ) potently inhibits TH17 development1, 2. Given the suppressive actions of TGF-β on IFN-γ production10, 11, 12, we speculated that TGF-β might contribute to TH17 development by limiting inhibitory actions of IFN-γ. Naive CD4+ T cells were therefore activated under TH2-neutralizing conditions and controlled availability of IL-23 and IFN-γ, with or without exogenous TGF-β1, and cytokine phenotypes were examined (Fig. 1). Addition of IL-23 did not substantially enhance development of IL-17+ cells unless endogenous IFN-γ was neutralized (Fig. 1a, top panel). Addition of TGF-β1 alone reduced the fraction of IFN-γ+ T cells by more than twofold and induced the development of a small, but appreciable, fraction of IL-17+ cells (Fig. 1a, bottom panel). In the presence of exogenous IL-23, TGF-β1 suppressed IFN-γ induction similarly to that in the absence of added IL-23, while modestly increasing IL-17+ cells. Under conditions of IL-23 addition and IFN-γ neutralization, exogenous TGF-β1 induced further suppression of IFN-γ+ cells compared to that of IL-23 addition alone and, notably, induced a markedly increased fraction of IL-17+ cells. Importantly, a similar induction of IL-17+ cells was found irrespective of exogenous IL-23 addition, suggesting that endogenous levels of IL-23 were either adequate or non-contributory. Collectively, these data indicate that in addition to its inhibitory effect on TH1 development, TGF-β1 promotes development of TH17 cells.

Figure 1: TGF-β1 is required for TH17 commitment, independently of IL-23.
a, Naive CD4+ T cells were isolated from DO11.10 TCR transgenic mice and activated with OVAp under the indicated conditions (see Supplementary Information for details). b, Naive CD4+ T cells from Ifng-/- mice were cultured with irradiated Ifng-/- splenocytes, anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody and anti-IL-4, with IL-23 and/or TGF-β1, as indicated. IFN-γ was included in cultures where indicated. c, Naive CD4+ T cells were isolated from wild-type (B6) mice and cultured with p40-/- splenocytes and anti-CD3, anti-IL-4 and anti-IFN-γ. Cultures were supplemented with nothing or IL-23 and TGF-β1 added alone or in combination. In all cases (a–c), T cells were recovered after 6 days and re-stimulated with PMA plus ionomycin for 5 h with monensin block before intracellular cytokine staining for IL-17 and IFN-γ, and analysis by flow cytometry. Plots are gated on CD4+ cells and the quadrant percentiles of cells staining positively for the indicated cytokines are shown. d, TGF-β and IFN-γ reciprocally induce expression of the IL-23 and IL-12 receptors. Naive CD4+ T cells isolated from Ifng-/- mice were activated with Ifng-/- splenocytes and anti-CD3 plus anti-IL-4. Cultures were supplemented with TGF-β1 alone, TGF-β1 plus IL-23, or IFN-γ plus IL-12, as indicated. After 6 days, T cells were collected and processed for mRNA quantification by real-time RT–PCR. Data shown are fold differences relative to T cells from a culture that was differentiated under non-polarizing (neutral) conditions (that is, was not supplemented with cytokines).

High resolution image and legend (109K)

To determine whether the augmenting effects of TGF-β1 were due to the enhanced suppression of IFN-γ or also to IFN-γ-independent mechanisms, we examined the effects of exogenous TGF-β1 on TH17 development under IFN-γ-null conditions. Naive Ifng-/- T cells were activated by Ifng-/- splenocytes as before under TH2-neutralizing conditions (Fig. 1b). Addition of IL-23 alone induced few IL-17+ cells, indicating that in the absence of IFN-γ, IL-23 alone is insufficient to promote robust TH17 development. Addition of TGF-β1 promoted a substantially increased fraction of IL-17+ cells, which was only modestly augmented by co-addition of exogenous IL-23. Therefore, TGF-β1 can act independently of IFN-γ blockade to promote TH17 development. Notably, reconstitution of IFN-γ-deficient cultures with high levels of exogenous IFN-γ strongly inhibited TH17 development despite abundant TGF-β1 and IL-23. Similar results were found for IL-4 (Supplementary Fig. S1). Thus, TGF-β, IFN-γ and IL-4 act antagonistically to specify TH17, TH1 or TH2 development, respectively.

Although the foregoing experiments identified an essential role for TGF-β1 in TH17 development, they did not exclude the possibility that TGF-β1 acts together with endogenous IL-23. We therefore used splenocytes from IL-12p40-deficient (Il12b-/-; hereafter called p40-/-) mice as a source of IL-23 (and IL-12)-deficient antigen-presenting cells (APCs) with which to examine TH17 development under defined conditions of IL-23 availability. Without IL-23 and exogenous TGF-β1, few IL-17-producing T cells were generated, and IL-23 alone did not restore TH17 development (Fig. 1c). Surprisingly, addition of TGF-β1 was sufficient to induce robust TH17 development in the absence of IL-23, and development of IL-17-producing T cells was only modestly enhanced by co-addition of IL-23. Under more stringent conditions of IFN-γ signalling deficiency, in which IFN-γ receptor-1-deficient (Ifngr-/-) T cells were used, more striking TGF-β1-dependent, IL-23-independent TH17 development was observed (Supplementary Fig. S2). Thus, TGF-β1 acts independently of IL-23 to induce TH17 lineage commitment.

The IL-23 receptor is a heterodimer of IL-12Rβ1, which is constitutively expressed by naive T cells, and IL-23R, which is not9. In view of the foregoing results, we speculated that TGF-β might act proximally in TH17 development to induce IL-23R upregulation, analogous to the induction of IL-12Rβ2 by IFN-γ during TH1 development13. We therefore compared expression of IL-12 and IL-23 receptors during TH1 or TH17 development. Naive T cells from Ifng-/- mice were activated under neutral cytokine conditions, or under TH17- or TH1-polarizing conditions, and relative expression of IL-12Rβ1, IL-12Rβ2 and IL-23R messenger RNA determined (Fig. 1d). Compared to neutral conditions, TH1 polarization induced IL-12Rβ2 expression while inhibiting IL-23R expression. In contrast, addition of TGF-β1 induced IL-23R expression, irrespective of IL-23 addition. Thus, TGF-β1 and IFN-γ differentially induce mRNA for IL-23 and IL-12 receptors, respectively. TGF-β1 thereby acts proximally in TH17 development to confer IL-23 responsiveness.

The foregoing results indicated a central role for TGF-β in the initiation of TH17 differentiation and placed TGF-β signalling proximal to IL-23 receptor expression and signalling in the TH17 developmental programme. To confirm and extend these findings in vivo, we used a natural rodent pathogen, Citrobacter rodentium14, for which an intact IL-23–IL-17 axis seems to be essential for host protection (Fig. 2 and D.B.O. et al., manuscript in preparation). In immunocompetent mice, C. rodentium induces a transient, distal colitis with resolution of lesions and clearance of the bacteria after 14–21 days, after induction of a systemic, CD4+ T-cell-dependent IgG response15, 16, 17. Although previously associated with TH1 adaptive immunity18, oral challenge with this organism induced a potent TH17 response that was associated with host protection. At the peak of inflammation, 8 days after inoculation (Fig. 2a), a large fraction of colonic CD4+ T cells expressed IL-17, compared with a lower frequency of cells that expressed IFN-γ (Fig. 2b). Mice deficient in IL-23 (p19-/-) failed to clear the infection, and uniformly succumbed at a rate comparable to mice deficient for both IL-12 and IL-23 (p40-/-) (Fig. 2c). Although uninfected wild-type and IL-23-deficient mice had similar baseline histological features, the latter developed significantly less colonic inflammation after infection (Fig. 2d), despite impaired bacterial clearance. The induction of an IL-17 response was unimpaired in all examined tissues of infected IL-23-deficient mice, and dominated the IFN-γ response before and after infection (Fig. 2e, and data not shown). Thus, despite an impaired inflammatory response, and deficiencies in bacterial clearance and host protection, IL-23-deficient mice were nevertheless competent to develop a vigorous effector IL-17 response. Therefore, whereas IL-23 is dispensable for the differentiation of IL-17-competent T cells, it is indispensable for a fully effective, protective TH17 response.

Figure 2: In vivo development of an IL-17 effector response to a TH17-dependent pathogen is IL-23-independent, but protection is IL-23-dependent.
a, Histopathology of distal colon of B6 (wild-type) mice inoculated orally with 1–2 × 109 CFU Citrobacter rodentium and analysed before colonization (d0), or at the peak of infection (d8). b, Cytokine phenotype of lamina propria lymphocytes isolated from B6 mice sham-infected (- ) or infected (+ ) with C. rodentium (8 days after inoculation) as in a. Recovered cells were processed for FACS as in Fig. 1. c, Survival analysis of wild-type (n = 5), p40-/- (n = 4) and p19-/- (n = 8) mice after infection with C. rodentium as in a. d, Histopathology of day 8 colonic tissues from sham-infected (- ) or infected (+ ) mice of the indicated genotypes. The arrow denotes bacteria adherent to colonic epithelial cells. e, Intracellular cytokine analysis of lamina propria CD4+ T cells isolated from wild-type or p19-/- mice 8 days after sham infection (- ) or infection (+ ) with C. rodentium as in a. Cytokine staining and analysis as in Fig. 1. f, Severe ulcerative, haemorrhagic colitis induced by anti-TGF-β treatment. Histopathology of day 8 colonic tissue from C. rodentium-infected p19-/- mice treated with anti-TGF-β as previously reported26. The arrows denote bacteria invading ulcerated colonic epithelium. All sections (except inset) were photographed at the same magnification (× 20).

High resolution image and legend (140K)

To determine whether TGF-β deficiency impaired TH17 development in vivo, we initially examined the effect of anti-TGF-β neutralizing antibody on the course of C. rodentium infection. IL-23-deficient mice (p19-/-) treated with anti-TGF-β developed severe ulcerative and haemorrhagic intestinal lesions with gross bacterial invasion, neither of which was found in IL-23-deficient mice treated with an isotype control, or infected wild-type mice (Fig. 2f). Although this suggested a critical role for TGF-β in protection against C. rodentium, a specific link with impaired TH17 development could not be made due to the rapid morbidity and mortality associated with this treatment (data not shown). We therefore examined development of TH17 cells in TGF-β1-deficient mice (Tgfb1-/-) in a non-infectious setting. In view of our finding that TH17 cells were normally enriched in intestinal tissues (Fig. 2, and data not shown), we surveyed T cells of the gut, as well as peripheral lymphoid tissues, for IL-17 expression (Fig. 3a). Compared to age- and sex-matched wild-type controls, we found that TH17 cells were profoundly diminished or absent in all tissue sites of TGF-β1-deficient mice; mice hemizygous for TGF-β1 deficiency (Tgfb+/-) were intermediate. Interestingly, deficiency of IL-17+ cells was associated with significant decreases in basal circulating levels of IL-17 (Fig. 3b), consistent with the predominance of T cells as a source of IL-17 and a major role for the TGF-β1 isoform in controlling homeostatic levels of IL-17 production. Furthermore, there was a striking, inverse correlation of IFN-γ-producing cells with TGF-β1 deficiency, in accord with the spontaneous autoinflammatory syndrome that these mice develop19, 20. Notably, although fewer naive precursors were present in Tgfb1-/- mice, there was no intrinsic defect in the ability of these cells to undergo TH17 development, provided that the high endogenous IFN-γ levels were at least partially neutralized and exogenous TGF-β1 was provided (Supplementary Fig. S3). Collectively, these data support a critical function for TGF-β1 in the development of TH17 cells in vivo.

Figure 3: Development of TH17 cells is impaired in TGF-β1-deficient mice.
a, CD4+ T cells were purified from the indicated tissues of Tgfb1-/- mice (- / - ), and age-matched hemizygous (+ / - ) and wild-type (+ / + ) littermates. Isolated cells were stimulated immediately after isolation with PMA and ionomycin for 5 h before intracellular cytokine staining for IL-17 and IFN-γ. Stained T cells were acquired and analysed by flow cytometry, as in Fig. 1. MLN, mesenteric lymph nodes; LPL, lamina propria lymphocytes. b, Serum from age-matched Tgfb1-/- mice (- / - ), and hemizygous (+ / - ) and wild-type (+ / + ) littermates, was collected and analysed for IL-17A by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Data are the mean ± s.e.m. of triplicate determinations from 4–8 mice.

High resolution image and legend (73K)

TGF-β1 has been associated with immunosuppression through its inhibitory effect on effector T-cell development (for example, TH1) and its role as an immunosuppressant cytokine produced by some regulatory T (Treg) cells. TGF-β1 also directs the development of Treg cells that express the transcription factor Foxp3 (refs 21, 22). We therefore examined whether TGF-β induced expression of Foxp3 together with IL-17. Naive T cells were activated in the presence of exogenous TGF-β1 and evaluated for intracellular expression of IL-17 and Foxp3 (Fig. 4). We found that distinct subpopulations of IL-17- and Foxp3-expressing T cells developed—albeit with a marked predominance of IL-17-producing T cells—under the conditions examined. As in previous experiments, the effects of exogenous IL-23 were modest in comparison to the effects of TGF-β1 alone. In accordance with a recent report23, we found that the frequency of Foxp3+ cells generated in the presence of TGF-β was inversely related to levels of IL-6, such that Foxp3+ cells were nearly extinguished in the presence of exogenous IL-6 (Supplementary Fig. S4). Thus, TGF-β seems to have a dual role in T-cell differentiation by directing distinct subpopulations of Foxp3+ Treg cells and TH17 cells, contingent upon the inflammatory cytokine environment, perhaps providing a mechanism by which Treg cells are poised to terminate TH17 responses after antigen clearance.

Figure 4: TGF-β1 induces IL-17 and Foxp3 expression by distinct CD4+ subpopulations.
a, Naive CD4+ T cells purified from Ifng-/- mice by FACS sorting were co-cultured with irradiated Ifng-/- splenic feeders and activated with anti-CD3 under TH2-neutralizing conditions. IL-23 or TGF-β1 was added alone or in combination. b, Naive CD4+ T cells were prepared from wild-type B6 mice and cultured with wild-type splenocytes, anti-CD3, TGF-β1, anti-IFN-γ and anti-IL-4 as in a. After 6 days in culture, T cells (from a and b) were re-stimulated with PMA and ionomycin before intracellular cytokine staining for IL-17 and Foxp3. Stained T cells were acquired and analysed by flow cytometry. Plots are gated on CD4+ cells and the quadrant percentiles are given for cells staining positively for IL-17 or Foxp3.

High resolution image and legend (39K)

Our findings, and complementary findings published during the revision of our paper23, define a role for TGF-β in TH17 lineage commitment, thereby linking this pleiotropic cytokine to adaptive immunity in a way that has important implications for mechanisms of host defence, immune homeostasis and autoimmunity. Although TGF-β has heretofore been associated primarily with immunosuppressive functions in T-cell immunity—either through the promotion of Treg development and function or inhibition of TH1 and TH2 development12—it is now apparent that TGF-β may also facilitate pro-inflammatory responses by promoting TH17 development. These data support a model in which early signalling by TGF-β in an inflammatory context initiates TH17 commitment and upregulates IL-23R, providing a basis for TGF-β and IL-23 effects in TH17 development that parallel those of, and are antagonized by, sequential IFN-γ and IL-12 signalling in TH1 development. The reciprocal and antagonistic actions of TGF-β, IFN-γ and IL-4 on TH17, TH1 and TH2 development—both through direct actions on the developing T cell and indirectly by modulating cytokine production by innate immune cells—provide an extended mechanism for the efficient matching of effector T-cell polarization, and thus adaptive immunity, to offending pathogens.

Top of page
